title: TextExpander to LaunchBar snippets
date: 2017-03-01 01:17

Catching up on my RSS feeds, I’ve just been through Dr Drang’s posts from nearly a year ago about switching away from TextExpander ([1][d1], [2][d2], [3][d3], [4][d4]). I’m a bit behind.

[d1]: http://leancrew.com/all-this/2016/04/the-new-textexpander/
[d2]: http://leancrew.com/all-this/2016/04/importing-textexpander-snippets-to-keyboard-maestro/
[d3]: http://leancrew.com/all-this/2016/04/a-little-more-textexpander/
[d4]: http://leancrew.com/all-this/2016/06/final-thoughts-on-switching-from-textexpander/

And since everything on here is effectively hero-worship to Dr Drang, it’s time to catch up.

Well that, or it’s actually sensible to think about switching away from TextExpander — the last update to the non-subscription version (5.1.4) was on February 21 2016.

There isn’t anything in the subscription version for me. In fact I barely use the features of TextExpander 5, rarely create new snippets, and generally am bad at using it.

I get the snippet reminder notification *all the time*, to the point where it’s frustrating. I am not good at remembering snippet abbreviations. That’s not necessarily helped by TextExpander encouraging me to create snippets for things that I type frequently for a short amount of time, only to then not type the phrase and forget the snippet exists entirely. Then we’re back to the snippet reminder again the next time I do type the phrase.

For a while I was using the inline search, which is really good. And then I forgot the shortcut for that and would periodically open the menubar — where of course the shortcut for inline search is not listed — and get frustrated each time.

I am bad at using TextExpander and I feel bad.

Because of this, I didn’t really want to switch snippets to Keyboard Maestro or one of the TextExpander-alikes.

Instead I settled on using [LaunchBar’s snippets][lb-s], which you search in exactly the same way that you search the main LaunchBar catalogue. Setting a keyboard shortcut for snippets and enabling “sub-search only” means that they’re not cluttering up your usual results either: they’re available when I type <span class="osx-menu">⌃⌥⌘Space</span> but otherwise out the way.

[lb-s]: https://help.obdev.at/resources/launchbar/help/Snippets.html

It’s a similar advantage to when [I moved my Safari bookmarklets to LaunchBar][bookmarklets]: if I forget the shortcut I can just type what I want.

[bookmarklets]: https://www.robjwells.com/2013/11/die-bookmarks-bar-die/

But so far this is just like TextExpander’s own inline search. And because snippets are part of LaunchBar there are some restrictions in using them *with LaunchBar*. Why bother?

Well, the overriding reason is still that TextExpander 5 is done. Sooner or later it’s going to stop working. It’s not a matter of whether I should switch but what to.

LaunchBar is a good fit because I use it everywhere, all the time. The snippets are just text files on disk, and so can be deleted or renamed directly from LaunchBar like any other file. They can be created too by sending items to the Add Snippet action.

Honestly I was a bit dismissive when snippets appeared in LaunchBar (“Why wouldn’t you just use TextExpander?”) but as a long-standing LaunchBar user they slot in to my workflow seamlessly.

The placeholders are more limited than in TextExpander, which is fine, and snippets are plain-text only, which is again fine as I had very few script snippets and fewer that I used. Anything I keep around will find a new home in Keyboard Maestro or FastScripts.

As with Keyboard Maestro, the snippet dates are formatted with Unicode patterns rather than strftime — which is a bit uncomfortable for me but never mind.

I do have one major criticism of LaunchBar though. If you followed the link to its [snippet documentation][lb-s] you’ll perhaps notice the old-style LaunchBar interface. Why?

> ### [Help not yet available][lb-help]
> 
> The Help for LaunchBar 6 is already in the works and will be available soon. In the meantime you might take a look at the Help of LaunchBar 5. Most of the information found there is still valid for LaunchBar 6.

[lb-help]: https://help.obdev.at/products/launchbar/documentation.html

LaunchBar 6 was released in June 2014. Maybe the docs will be in LaunchBar 7? In the meantime, time to actually read that copy of [Take Control of LaunchBar][tc].

[tc]: https://www.takecontrolbooks.com/launchbar
