title: SS-GB, pt3
date: 2017-03-06 10:00
draft

I think I might be done with [SS-GB][], having just watched the [third episode][]. My problems are mainly with the plot, and I know, I know, it's an adaptation of [Len Deighton's novel][novel] but crikey.

I've criticised the ludicrous idea of a warm [Nazi-Soviet alliance before][blog] but Sunday's episode was the one with Marx getting dug up so that bloody well needs to go on the list. The series is set in November 1941, a year and a half after the Nazis began drawing up invasion plans of the Soviet Union — which was to be a "[war of annihilation][]."

But mostly it's the idea of the collusion between the highest ranks of the German army in Britain with the resistance — who are fighting each other in northern Britain — to help the king escape SS custody.

I think the logical grounding for this, as much as there is one, is the idea that the German army was dominated by aristocrats and they're a bit put out by the brash "true believers" of the SS. Far easier to do a deal with their upper-class counterparts in Britain — the leaders of the resistance.

But this is pretty threadbare stuff. While there was some resistance in the army to the Nazis it was pretty consequential and manifested mostly at times of doubt over Germany’s military fortunes. Early misgivings were washed away by German successes, and in the situation of SS-GB where they've conquered most of Britain it's safe to say that morale among German army officers would be reasonably high.

That this supposed oppositional faction has a counterpart in the British upper classes is also highly questionable, given their support for fascism, anti-semitism and fear of communism. After the publication of footage of Elizabeth Windsor giving a Nazi salute as a child, [Max Hastings reviewed this history in the Daily Mail][mail]. The Mail of course knows all about support for fascism, what with its "[Hurrah for the Blackshirts!][blackshirts]" of 1934 and all that.

[mail]: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3167622/MAX-HASTINGS-Queen-blameless-aristocrats-DID-support-Nazis-Second-World-War.html
[blackshirts]: https://commons.m.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:%22Hurrah_for_the_Blackshirts!%22.jpg

At this point it's worth reflecting on why exactly some members of the ruling class opposed Nazism. Here's what Churchill told Soviet ambassador Ivan Maisky in 1938:

> Today, the greatest menace to the British Empire is German Nazism, with its idea of Berlin’s global hegemony. That is why at the present time, I spare no effort in the struggle against Hitler.”

Churchill had, as war minister 20 years earlier, tried to "strangle" Soviet communism "in its crib" (his words) through the Western invasion. In addition he bears much responsibility for the Bengal famine and its Xmillion deaths; then secretary of state for India Leopold Amery, noted that "on the subject of India, Winston is not quite sane" and that he didn't "see much difference between [Churchill's] outlook and Hitler's".

There's much more that could be said but the point is not to confuse practical anti-Nazism with principled anti-fascism, to not allow "But Churchill!" in discussions on ruling class support for fascism. In a different situation — India, Kenya, Malaya, wherever else — the anti-Nazism of the white-supremacist colonial torturer looks distinctly weak. (One of my "favourite" second world war stories is when the British re-armed Japanese fascist troops to kill Indonesian and Vietnamese liberation fighters struggling to prevent the return of colonial domination.)
